This is Part 4 of the series, “ADblock your Wifi”. In this series, I share with you how to ADblock you entire home wifi network, effectively stopping web advertisements from entering your entire Wifi network at home. This protects your web browser, your PC, your phones, tablets, and any other devices using the same wifi connection.
In this part, we discuss the various issues and concerns such as security, viability, privacy and reliability. Since I am a stranger on the Internet, running a service to you, there are some things I need to clear up with you about my service. Interested? Read on.
If you have been following the guides in this series, your entire wifi network would be free from ads by now. WELL DONE! It might took some time and efforts, but you are reaping the benefits now.
If you read part 3, you would already know how this adblocking technique works, and would have learned a lot. You would then realise that to use this adblocking, you need to use my DNS servers for all your DNS queries. Before this, you used your ISP’s or Google’s DNS servers similarly. However, I am just some random guy you found on the Internet, you have to trust me a little (a lot actually) to use my service, so there’s that. We want to clear that up right here and now.
There are also other issues that I would like to cover here, such as my motivation and reasons for doing this. Also, I would like to discuss some future plans and policies with this adblocking. I will discuss these matters one after another.
Let’s move on.
Reason for setting up DNS Firewall
To block ads. That’s it. No seriously now. In part 1, I already showed you that adblocking is hard, and most techniques have to be applied to each and every device, and some only works on web browsers. There is no single solutions that works across the entire Wifi network. DNS adblocking seemed like the best all encompassing solution.
I first started this technique by setting up a small DNS Firewall server using a Raspberry Pi 2. It worked flawlessly, blocking ads for all devices in the network. Then, I had a problem. Sometimes, I get power outages at home, and the server would stop working. At reboot, it would not restore the DNS function, and we would have apparent network interruption because of this. Sometime the Pi SD card would break during power outage, and I would have to reinstall.
Point is, I am the only on who knows how to fix it at my home. Sometimes I would have to revert to Google’s DNS until I could fix it. One interruption is enough and I would not hear the end of the complains. That’s when I decided to move to professional hosts, and make the servers public. That way, even after a power outage, the DNS would just continue to work, and my router would just point to it. No issues.
Secondly, I realised that setting up public DNS firewalls means that I could share this service with friends and relatives. I would go to a friend’s house, tinker his router to point to my servers, and presto, no more ads. It was so simple.
Your DNS Firewall Servers are OVERKILL!!!
Yes, that’s right. Setting up and maintaining actual DNS servers is a pain in the butt. It is overkill considering that all I wanted to do was stop seeing ADS everywhere on the net. But, it’s worth it. Setting up the servers themselves is hard, but it pays off at scale.
Imagine, all we have to do is make sure the servers run, and the blacklist updated, and perhaps we could stop ads from thousands of households. At scale, the thousands of ad-free users worth more than the price and efforts  setting up 2 servers.
Server Performance
I’ll be honest, my DNS Firewall servers cannot compete in terms of performance and capacity, compared to gigantic servers, say Google’s or even you ISP’s servers. Those big guns serve millions of DNS requests, and are very reliable.
Here’s the thing. DNS queries do not take up a lot of bandwidth. You are not forwarding your entire Internet traffic to me, only IP lookups. IP lookups don’t consume a lot of bandwidth. So far, I only have a few consumers of my DNS, way- WAYYYY below my capacity. We need at least a few thousand of users before I have to upgrade.
In addition, DNS queries are not sent out each time you need to access a resource. DNS queries are cached locally in your client, and also in your router. A single DNS query when cached can serve hundreds of resource requests, before the cache expires.
DNS Response Policy
My DNS servers are configured to give you exactly the correct DNS response for non-adserver domain-names. Every response is exactly what you should get if you were to use Google’s DNS servers. However, when it comes to DNS queries for adservers, I have to sabotage the DNS response somehow.
The current policy I adopt is, for adservers, I will return the IP address of the respective DNS server itself. The DNS servers are configured to return a 404 page for any HTTP requests. This ensures that HTTP requests for ads are always responded with 404 error, since the target server is known and configured to do so.
Other options also include responding with 127.0.0.1 (localhost). Since most people don’t have anything hosted on their PCs, ads will fail with connection refused. I actually thought of doing that as well, but I cannot be sure that you don’t have anything hosted. It is quite possible that you have a website in development that you are working on your PC, and redirecting ads to localhost in this case could cause unpredictable results.
The are other possible options for response policies as well. For example, I could also return a domain-name error, or domain-name not known or something like it. We can discuss them later. For now, redirecting to the 404 pages seems like a good option. If we decided to change this response behavior in the future, all we have to do is a make small change on the servers.
Privacy
Privacy is of some concern when it comes to using this technique. In Part 2, I gave you instructions to forward all you DNS queries to me, with the promise that I would response request for adserver domain-names with faulty IP addresses. However, that cause another concern. Now, if I wanted, I could log every DNS request that came from every IP. So, if a Wifi network has a user that wants to browse Pr0N sites or something, I would know about it. Suppose a user in your Wifi network tries to access a torrent site, I would know about it. You might feel that your privacy is being threatened when you use my DNS firewall servers.
But here’s the thing, I don’t know who owns what IP. Each source IP that makes a DNS query to my servers belongs to somebody, but I don’t know who that is. I simply do not have the means to find out who you are, from your IP alone, and to be honest, I don’t care. I am also not obligated to divulge such information to anyone. Plus, home network IP addresses are dynamic and get changed all the time, so that makes it even more difficult for me to track you. If at any time you feel that using my services compromise your privacy somehow, then stop. Revert your changes, stop using my servers, and go back to using Google’s or your ISP’s servers.
Your ISP on the other hand, knows who you are, to whom your IP address is registered at any time, even the IP address of the servers that you are trying to access. Whether or not you use their DNS servers, they already know so much about you.
Google knows everything. Every time you log in, use their search, you are being profiled and any information they can get on you will be used against you. There is no need for you to use their DNS servers, they know you already.
Every time you use a service on the Internet, you are being profiled. Your ISP could profile you, Google profiles you. I don’t. The only reason I let you use my DNS firewall servers, is because I know how difficult and painful it is to set one up yourself. I already have 2 working, and I could never exhaust the bandwidth on DNS queries. I let you use mine because it seemed more of a waste if I don’t. There’s that, take it with a mountain grain of salt.
If you don’t like using my DNS servers, there are various other alternatives methods to block ads. You can still sabotage the DNS queries of adservers using hosts files, or other tricks. Your router probably has some advanced options that you could use to block ads as well. You could even host your own DNS Firewall servers, if I could do it, you can too. In fact, I might teach you how. But, all these pales in comparison to simply forwarding your DNS queries to me, in terms of effectiveness, and how easy it is to set up.
When you use my DNS servers, you have to kinda trust me a little. Without this trust, then you should not use my service. But, I’m telling you that I won’t track you for any purpose whatsoever. That’s all I can say.
Your choice.
Security
Security is a big concern when it comes to browsing the Internet. You don’t want people to be able to see your passwords, or access your bank information. That’s a no-no. You cannot let some Wifi Adblock exercise compromise security.
I have already demonstrated to you that if you use my DNS Firewall servers, I redirect all adservers requests to a 404 page. However, since I control your DNS requests now, I could also in theory conduct a phishing attack on you. It would be simple. I keep blocking ads, as expected. For some legit sites, such as banks, I redirect you to my own servers. Then, anything you enter to my site, such as logins and passwords, I would know. Basically, I would leverage some DNS shenanigans, to conduct a scam on you.
There are a few things to mitigate this. For one, this cannot be done with HTTPS sites. Your browser would throw alarm bells every time I try a phishing for HTTPS sites. Banks have their login page, if not their entire websites in HTTPS. In addition, bank’s HTTPS certs also contains further verifications that makes it hard to spoof them. Most banks have already taken steps to prevent phishing. It is not easy to replicate a bank’s login page. As long as you check your urls, make sure you are browsing HTTPS, then it’s not easy to do this phishing on you.
Secondly, it is very easy to check if I am doing any sorts of DNS shenanigans. You do a lookup test.
nslookup [domain-name] [target dns-server IP]
Do a check of any domain-name, against my dns firewall servers, and do another one against Google’s DNS servers. Compare the results to see if any shenanigans were involved. If there are no discrepancies, there are no shenanigans.
Of course, this goes back to our previous arguments, if you don’t feel comfortable using this DNS service, you should not use it. Especially since I am not a reputable service provider. That’s also the reason why I am baring all this issue for you to see.
Safety
I know I would not do any shenanigans to do phishing on you. I also promise not to track you. But what if the servers got compromised? If a 3rd party compromises the server, they could in theory conduct shenanigans using my servers.
That’s correct. Again, back to our previous argument, if you are not comfortable, revert. If you want to use my service, take it with a mountain grain of salt.
But, what I will do is secure and harden my server as much as possible. This is on best effort basis.
What you can do is alert me of any potential security threats. That way, I can act to mitigate the risk.
What’s in the blacklist?
I have mentioned that I use a large blacklist of adservers as reference. Any domain-name in the list gets redirected to a 404 page. But, how do I compile the list? There are a lot of adservers, and it’s not easy to keep track of them.
Fortunately, others have done the harf work for me. I use the following sources:
http://adaway.org/hosts.txt
http://pgl.yoyo.org/adservers/serverlist.php?hostformat=hosts&mimetype=plaintext
http://winhelp2002.mvps.org/hosts.txt
http://hosts-file.net/ad_servers.txt
The sources contains list of adservers only. It is also possible for me to block other stuffs, such as shock-sites, and malware-sites. I won’t block download sites, torrents, or do any kind of censorship. For the moment, I am sticking to adservers only, but we can discuss this in the future. I am open to suggestions.
Hosting it yourself
Yes, you can definitely host the DNS firewall servers on your own. All you need is a LAN connected machine that can boot Linux. I recommend a Raspberry Pi, as it is cheap, and low power. There are may guides on the internet. I will consider writing a guide myself in the future.
This way, you don’t have to use my DNS Firewall servers. Just forward all your DNS queries to that single self-hosted DNS server. This takes care of the ‘trust’ issue that we have, and it’s safer too.
Conclusion
Well, that is all I have for now. That’s all I wanted to cover about this ‘service’ that I am providing to you. I hope you find it useful.
Barrista signing off.