This is Part 1 of the series, “ADblock your Wifi”. In this series, I will share with you how to ADblock you entire home wifi network, effectively stopping web advertisements from entering your entire Wifi network at home. This protects your web browser, your PC, your phones, tablets, and any other devices using the same wifi connection.
But first, you might be asking,“I could just install Adblock Plus on Chrome/Firefox and be done with it, why do I need this?”. As PART 1 of this series, this article details a little back-story as to why you MIGHT want to do it MY way. Read on.
The Internet is an awesome place, now with Ads
The Internet is awesome. Here, is where you play online games while your losing opponent tell you to get a life, watch funny cat videos, people FAILS and accident videos, and tell the world about your ‘opinion’. Here, we share funny pictures, seek attention, troll people and judge each other. In general, the internet is a really fun place.
In general, the internet is a really fun place… except when it’s not.
However, it is not as much fun if every single fucking page you want to visit has to shower you with ads. Every fucking page. Even downloading pirated movies has become such a chore now. “No sir, I do not need all these minefields of adverts disguised as download buttons. I just need the one download button, thank you”. You’ll be hard pressed to find a decent blog that is not also littered with ads. “No sir, I do not believe that young single women in my areas are interested in me. I do not need to see her webcam too, thank you.”
Hmm, this button looks legit enough… OH COME ON!!!
Adblock extension for Chrome and Firefox
Good news. If you’re smart enough to install Chrome or Firefox, you could also install extensions such as adblock, adblock plus, adblock edge to help block most adverts. Most ads should just disappear after that. Most people already know how to do this. Even if you didn’t actually know that you can do this, if you actually bother to stop seeing ads, you could google for the answer, and most people would arrive at the same conclusion. Or, if you have a smart friend, he/she could install this for you.
Adblock extension for Chrome / Firefox work well, but are limited to PCs/Laptops only.
Bad news, adblock extensions now only works on PC/Laptop. There is no version for your other devices yet. Additionally, suppose you have several PCs, a couple of laptops at home, now it might become a chore to install/maintain adblock on each PC and Laptop. What if it’s your parents’ laptop? Your SO’s? Now, you have to force them to use Chrome or Firefox, just so you could install adblock. Then, they’ll forget that you told them not to use IE, and you are back at square 1; they still complain about all the ads they are seeing again, and won’t let you take away their favorite browser IE.
AdAway for rooted Android devices
Back to your other devices. Android phones and tablets can use a special tool called AdAway, that blocks ads from entering the phone. It works by combining the Android hosts file with a long blacklist of known domain names of ad servers.Because of this, whenever any application needs the address for any of the known ads server domain name, the phone returns a phony answer, hence the ads would fail to load. It works on all apps and browsers on the phone that tries to load advertisements.
However, it requires the phone to be rooted. Rooting is fine and dandy for people of the right skill and enough will to do it, but not all devices can be rooted easily. Some rooting methods risk data loss or even bricking the phone. I can imagine the conversation you could be having with your SO, “Honey, I can stop all the ads, but I need to root your phone. All data will be lost, cat pictures and everything, and I risk bricking it too”. Doesn’t sound so pretty huh? If she says NO, you’d still have to hear her complain about all the ads that she don’t want to see on her phone.
AdAway requires the android device to be rooted, which is another pain in the ass
What if it’s an iPhone? iPad? Not possible. I don’t know of any easy method to edit the hosts file on an iDevice. They are locked down so hard, even if you could do it, you stand a higher risk bricking your iDevice, and voiding you warranty.
ADblock your Wifi network
And so, we arrive at the center of this long-winded discussion. If all your devices connect to the internet via a common Wifi router, would it not be smarter if you could configure your router, such that no ads could enter your entire Wifi network?
Imagine what would happen, if you could block ads from entering your entire home Wifi network. It no longer matters what device or platform you use, whether you are using a Windows PC, Mac Laptop, Android device, Apple device, and it no longer matters what browser or apps you want to use, whether IE/Chrome/Firefox/Safari, games on Android, you could block Ads across all those.
All you have to do is configure your one Wifi router
All you have to do is configure your one Wifi router. Just one place to config, and it works on all devices. No more hassle of dealing with each device. You have guests coming over? Let them in your network, and you have just stopped ads for them as well.
In short, Adblocking your Wifi network takes the least effort! A single configuration effort is all you need. However the impact extends across each and every device, browsers and apps that you might want to run.
Wifi Adblock Technique: DNS Firewall
The technique that I use and propose here is called DNS Firewall, sometimes known as DNS Poisoning and DNS Spoofing. Since I have already done all the hard work to set up this DNS Firewall as a FREE SERVICE to you, all you have to do is go ahead to Part 2 and follow the steps needed to configure Adblocking on your Wifi router. This will set up your Wifi router to make use of my DNS Firewall servers in order to ADblock your Wifi network. For the moment, I provide the DNS Firewall servers free-of-charge as a service to you.
I might not get the terms exactly right, but in Part 3 of this series, I will explain in detail the principles and logic of this technique, and a brief on how I have implemented them. I will also discuss the advantages and disadvantages, security concerns, trust concerns and other issues related to this DNS Firewall technique. Part 3 is mostly educational and can be skipped if you don’t need the extra information. However, it will also serve to display some transparency regarding the service that I am providing to you.
Other Topics
For those interested, I might also provide subsequent parts for additional topics. For those who wants to use this technique, but would rather not use DNS Firewall servers hosted by strangers on the internet, I have a topic in mind to discuss how to host/configure your own DNS Firewall. I also plan to discuss on other adblocking techniques, other than the ones highlighted here.
Until then, Barista signing off.